Relying Party Solution (#615)
italia/eidas-it-wallet-docs: docs/en/relying-party-instance.rst

.. include:: ../common/common_definitions.rst

.. _relying-party-instance:

Relying Party Instance
=========================

The Relying Party Instance (RPI) is a mobile or embedded application designed to request, receive, and process Digital Credentials from Wallet Instances in a trusted manner. Each RPI ensures the integrity, confidentiality and authenticity of Credential exchanges, enabling secure interactions between Users and Relying Parties.

There are two primary types of Relying Party Instances, each serving different operational environments:

> - **Mobile Relying Party Instance**: a native application running on a mobile device (e.g., smartphone or tablet). Each instance corresponds to a specific installation of the application on a device. A Mobile Relying Party Instance functions as a public client, operating on end-user devices where sensitive Credentials cannot be fully protected from potential threats. This implies additional security measures to establish and maintain trust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Embedded Relying Party Instance**: an hardware/software solution running on a specialized device (e.g., turnstiles). Each instance corresponds to a specific installation of the application on an embedded device. Since the trust with the Embedded Relying Party Instance is established through the trust established with the Mobile Relying Party Provider, the Embedded Relying Party Instance can be considered a confidential client.
- **Mobile Relying Party Instance**: a native application running on a mobile device (e.g., smartphone or tablet). Each instance corresponds to a specific installation of the application on a device. Since the trust with the Mobile Relying Party Instance is established through the trust established with the Mobile Relying Party Provider, the Mobile Relying Party Instance can be considered a confidential client.
```

- **Web Relying Party Instance**: a remote application operated by the Relying Party. A Web Relying Party Instance operates as a confidential client, meaning it can securely store confidential configurations (such as its private cryptographic keys) on a remote server. In this context, the Relying Party is unprovisioned and the presentation request and validation is automatically handled by software.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. note::
  Mobile and Embedded Relying Party Instances acting as public client are not considered within this specifications.

```

.. note::
  

>   Unlike the Web Relying Party Instance, a Mobile Relying Party Instance requires proper lifecycle management and special registration procedures managed through the Relying Party Backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Unlike the Web Relying Party Instance, a Mobile and Embedded Relying Party Instance requires proper lifecycle management and special registration procedures managed through the Relying Party Backend.
```

Further technical and operational details are discussed in the following sections.

Mobile Relying Party Instance
--------------------------------

> A Mobile Relying Party Instance is a native application that runs on mobile devices and enables User's Digital Credentials verification within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. It operates as a public client on end-user devices, requiring additional security measures to establish trust. It has a well-defined lifecycle with four main states (**Installed**, **Operational**, **Verified**, and **Uninstalled**) and supports essential functionalities such as registration, access certificate reissuance, and revocation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Mobile Relying Party Instance's lifecycle includes four main states: **Installed**, **Operational**, **Verified**, and **Uninstalled**, supporting functionalities such as registration, access certificate reissuance, and revocation. 
```

Reviewer: the removed text is about contents already said above

    Lifecycle of the Mobile Relying Party Instance

As shown in :numref:`fig_RelyingParty_Instance_Mobile_Lifecycle`, the Mobile Relying Party Instance has four distinct states: **Installed**, **Operational**, **Verified**, and **Uninstalled**. Each state represents a specific functional status and determines the actions that can be performed.

Transition to Installed
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The state machine begins with the Relying Party Instance installation (**RPI INST** transition), where Users download and install a Relying Party Instance using the official app store of their device's operating system, leading to the **Installed** state.

While in this state, the Relying Party Instance MUST interact only with the Relying Party Backend to be registered (i.e., to verify the Instance integrity, register Hardware Cryptographic Keys and obtain an Access Certificate).

> When the revocation of the Relying Party Instance occurs (**RPI REV** transition), the Relying Party Instance MUST go back from **Operational** to **Installed**. This transition implies the following operations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the revocation of the Relying Party Instance occurs (**RPI REV** transition), the Relying Party Instance MUST get back from **Operational** to **Installed**. This transition implies the following operations:
```

1. **Initialization**: After verification of the Relying Party Instance integrity, it registers a pair of Hardware Cryptographic Keys.
2. **Access Certificate Issuance**: The Relying Party Instance obtains an Access Certificate.

In case the Access Certificate is expired, a new certificate can be issued to the Relying Party Instance; this operation is represented by the **CERT REISS** transition towards the **Verified** state.

While in this state, the Relying Party Instance can request the presentation of Digital Credentials to Wallet Instances (**PID/(Q)EAA PRE**), using the Access Certificate to authenticate itself.

Transition to Operational
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The expiration of the Access Certificate (**CERT EXP** transition) leads to the **Operational** state.

> While in this state, the Relying Party Instance can still request the presentation of Digital Credentials to Wallet Instances for a grace period. However, as the certificate is expired, a specific disclaimer MUST be displayed to the User of the Wallet Instance during the presentation flow; for this reason, this operation is represented by the label **PID/(Q)EAA PRE***. This is required to support offline presentation flows. After the grace period has passed, the Relying Party Instance will no longer be able to request presentations and will be de-registered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While in this state, the Relying Party Instance can still request the presentation of Digital Credentials to Wallet Instances during the grace period. However, as the certificate is expired, a specific disclaimer MUST be displayed to the User of the Wallet Instance during the presentation flow; for this reason, this operation is represented by the label **PID/(Q)EAA PRE***. This is required to support offline presentation flows. After the grace period has passed, the Relying Party Instance MUST NOT longer request presentations and will be de-registered.
```

  1. Requests the Key Attestation APIs to create a ``key_attestation`` value linked to the ``client_data_hash``.
  2. Receives a signed ``key_attestation`` value from the Key Attestation APIs, authenticated by the OEM.

**Steps 9-11:** The Mobile Relying Party Instance:

  1. Generates an ``hardware_signature`` value by signing the ``client_data_hash`` with the Hardware Cryptographic private key, serving as a proof of possession for the Cryptographic Hardware Keys.
  2. Generates the Integrity Validation Request in the form of a JWT. This JWT includes ``key_attestation``, ``hardware_signature``, ``nonce``, ``hardware_key_tag``, and ``cnf`` (representing ``key_pub``); it is signed using ``key_priv``.
  3. Submits the Integrity Validation Request to the :ref:`Relying Party Integrity Validation Endpoint` of the Relying Party Backend.

.. code-block::
    :caption: Non-normative example of the Mobile Relying Party Integrity Validation Request JWT, without encoding and signature applied
    :name: _code_RelyingParty_Instance_Mobile_Registration_IntegrityValidation_JWT

    {
      "alg": "ES256",
      "kid": "hT3v7KQjFZy6GvDkYgOZ1u2F6T4Nz5bPjX8o1MZ3dJY",

>       "typ": "ivr+jwt"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      "typ": "rp-ivr+jwt"
```

    :name: _code_RelyingParty_Instance_Mobile_Registration_AccessCertificate_Response

    HTTP/1.1 200 OK
    Content-Type: application/json

    {
      "access_certificate": "hajdnhaghSDGns..."
    }

Mobile Relying Party Instance Access Certificate Reissuance
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The issuance of a new Access Certificate follows the same flow described in the :ref:`Mobile Relying Party Instance Registration` section for **Access Certificate Issuance**. Those certificates MAY be issued as short-lived (typically valid within 24 hours) or long-lived.

Mobile Relying Party Instance Revocation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Relying Parties MUST periodically verify the Relying Party Instance's authenticity and security.
When security issues are detected, Relying Parties MUST revoke the Relying Party Instance, revoking its X.509 Access Certificate (in case of long-lived certificates), and in any case, Relying Parties MUST NOT allow the re-issue of certificates. 
As a result, Mobile Relying Party Instance revocation MUST be tied to X.509 Access Certificates validity.

> Long-lived certificates MUST implement the standard revocation mechanisms as defined in :rfc:`5280`, including Certificate Revocation Lists (CRLs) and/or Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Long-lived X.509 Certificates follows the requirements about their lifecycle, defined in :ref:`The Infrastructure of Trust`.
```

- **Web Relying Party Instance**: a remote application operated by the Relying Party. A Web Relying Party Instance operates as a confidential client, meaning it can securely store confidential configurations (such as its private cryptographic keys) on a remote server. In this context, the Relying Party is unprovisioned and the presentation request and validation is automatically handled by software.

.. note::
  Mobile and Embedded Relying Party Instances acting as public clients are not considered within these specifications.

.. note::
  
  Unlike the Web Relying Party Instance, a Mobile and Embedded Relying Party Instance requires proper lifecycle management and special registration procedures managed through the Relying Party Backend.

Further technical and operational details are discussed in the following sections.

Mobile Relying Party Instance
--------------------------------

> A Mobile Relying Party Instance's lifecycle includes four main states: **Installed**, **Operational**, **Verified**, and **Uninstalled**, supporting functionalities such as registration, access Certificate reissuance, and revocation. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Mobile Relying Party Instance's lifecycle includes four main states: **Installed**, **Operational**, **Verified**, and **Uninstalled**, supporting functionalities such as registration, Access Certificate reissuance, and revocation. 
```

> A Mobile Relying Party Instance's lifecycle includes four main states: **Installed**, **Operational**, **Verified**, and **Uninstalled**, supporting functionalities such as registration, Access Certificate reissuance, and revocation. 

Reviewer 3: In my opinion the operational state is confused with that of the Wallet Instance, what do you think about using another name? For example unverified or expired?

    {
      "access_certificate": "hajdnhaghSDGns..."
    }

Mobile Relying Party Instance Access Certificate Reissuance
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The issuance of a new Access Certificate follows the same flow described in the :ref:`Mobile Relying Party Instance Registration` section for **Access Certificate Issuance**. Those certificates MAY be issued as short-lived (typically valid within 24 hours) or long-lived.

Mobile Relying Party Instance Revocation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Relying Parties MUST periodically verify the Relying Party Instance's authenticity and security.
When security issues are detected, Relying Parties MUST revoke the Relying Party Instance, revoking its X.509 Access Certificate (in case of long-lived certificates), and in any case, Relying Parties MUST NOT allow the re-issue of certificates. 
As a result, Mobile Relying Party Instance revocation MUST be tied to X.509 Access Certificates validity.

Long-lived certificates MUST implement the standard revocation mechanisms as defined in :rfc:`5280`, including Certificate Revocation Lists (CRLs) and/or Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP).

> These revocation mechanisms are aligned with the trust model described in Section :ref:`The Infrastructure of Trust`, ensuring consistent and reliable certificate validation across the ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Web Relying Party Instance
--------------------------------

> As mentioned in the introduction, a Web Relying Party Instance differs from Mobile Relying Party in its security classification and operational model. While Web Instances operate as confidential clients with server-side security controls that can safely store secrets and cryptographic keys in a controlled environment, Mobile Instances function as public clients running on end-user devices where security guarantees are inherently limited. This fundamental difference necessitates distinct approaches to registration, lifecycle management, and trust establishment. Web Instances can be directly registered with the Trust Anchor or Intermediary Entities through federation endpoints, while Mobile Instances require device attestation, hardware-backed key verification, and Access Certificates issued by the Relying Party Backend to establish and maintain trust within the IT-Wallet ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Web Instances operates server-side security controls that safely store secrets and cryptographic keys in a controlled environment. Web Instances MUST be registered with the Trust Anchor or Intermediary Entities, according to :ref:`The Infrastructure of Trust`.
```

.. include:: ../common/common_definitions.rst

.. _relying-party-instance:

Relying Party Instance
=========================

> The Relying Party Instance (RPI) is a distinct and secure application designed to request, receive, and process Digital Credentials from Wallet Instances in a trusted manner. Each instance ensures the integrity, confidentiality and authenticity of credential exchanges, enabling secure interactions between Users and Relying Parties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Relying Party Instance (RPI) is a mobile or embedded application designed to request, receive, and process Digital Credentials from Wallet Instances in a trusted manner. Each RPI ensures the integrity, confidentiality and authenticity of Credential exchanges, enabling secure interactions between Users and Relying Parties.
```

There are two primary types of Relying Party Instances, each serving different operational environments:

> - **Mobile Relying Party Instance**: a native application running on a mobile device (e.g., smartphone or tablet). Each instance corresponds to a specific installation of the application on a device. A Mobile Relying Party Instance functions as a public client, operating on end-user devices where sensitive credentials cannot be fully protected from potential threats. This implies additional security measures to establish and maintain trust.

Reviewer: I believe that this is very limitating. Nothing prevents to issue an X.509 certificate from the RP solution backend to a specific RPI, enabling it on behalf of a legal person and therefore be fully evaluable in all about trust

Reviewer: I'd also add that Mobile RPI might be human provisioned or not, embedded hardware won't require any human interaction to keep control of the presentation flow.

Author: @peppelinux sounds good to you if we add the following text _after_ the bullet list?

`
There are various other types of Relying Party Instances, such as kiosks, totems, readers, and other embedded devices, each serving different operational environments and scenarios, whether supervised or unsupervised. These additional Relying Party Instance types are not currently addressed in this implementation profile.
`

Reviewer: may we write these specification to include all the RPI types?

of which elements the current text lacks to include them all?

> - **Web Relying Party Instance**: a remote application operated by the Relying Party. A Web Relying Party Instance operates as a confidential client, meaning it can securely store credentials (such as private keys) on a server controlled by the Relying Party. In this context, the Relying Party has direct control over the authentication and verification process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Web Relying Party Instance**: a remote application operated by the Relying Party. A Web Relying Party Instance operates as a confidential client, meaning it can securely store confidential configurations (such as its private cryptographic keys) on a remote server. In this context, the Relying Party is unprovisioned and the presentation request and validation is automatically handled by software.
```

.. note::
  
  Unlike the Web Relying Party Instance, a Mobile Relying Party Instance requires proper lifecycle management and special registration procedures managed through the Relying Party Backend.

Further technical and operational details are discussed in the following sections.

Mobile Relying Party Instance
--------------------------------

> 

Reviewer: add any short introductionary text about the general purpose and content of this macro section

Author: done

.. include:: ../common/common_definitions.rst

.. _relying-party-instance:

Relying Party Instance
=========================

The Relying Party Instance (RPI) is a mobile or embedded application designed to request, receive, and process Digital Credentials from Wallet Instances in a trusted manner. Each RPI ensures the integrity, confidentiality and authenticity of Credential exchanges, enabling secure interactions between Users and Relying Parties.

There are two primary types of Relying Party Instances, each serving different operational environments:

> - **Mobile Relying Party Instance**: a native application running on a mobile device (e.g., smartphone or tablet). Each instance corresponds to a specific installation of the application on a device. A Mobile Relying Party Instance functions as a public client, operating on end-user devices where sensitive credentials cannot be fully protected from potential threats. This implies additional security measures to establish and maintain trust.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Mobile Relying Party Instance**: a native application running on a mobile device (e.g., smartphone or tablet). Each instance corresponds to a specific installation of the application on a device. A Mobile Relying Party Instance functions as a public client, operating on end-user devices where sensitive Credentials cannot be fully protected from potential threats. This implies additional security measures to establish and maintain trust.
```

- **Web Relying Party Instance**: a remote application operated by the Relying Party. A Web Relying Party Instance operates as a confidential client, meaning it can securely store confidential configurations (such as its private cryptographic keys) on a remote server. In this context, the Relying Party is unprovisioned and the presentation request and validation is automatically handled by software.

.. note::
  
  Unlike the Web Relying Party Instance, a Mobile Relying Party Instance requires proper lifecycle management and special registration procedures managed through the Relying Party Backend.

Further technical and operational details are discussed in the following sections.

Mobile Relying Party Instance
--------------------------------

> A Mobile Relying Party Instance is a native application that runs on mobile devices and enables user digital credential verification within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. It operates as a public client on end-user devices, requiring additional security measures to establish trust. It has a well-defined lifecycle with four main states (**Installed**, **Operational**, **Verified**, and **Uninstalled**) and supports essential functionalities such as registration, access certificate reissuance, and revocation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Mobile Relying Party Instance is a native application that runs on mobile devices and enables User's Digital Credentials verification within the IT-Wallet ecosystem. It operates as a public client on end-user devices, requiring additional security measures to establish trust. It has a well-defined lifecycle with four main states (**Installed**, **Operational**, **Verified**, and **Uninstalled**) and supports essential functionalities such as registration, access certificate reissuance, and revocation. 
```

Reviewer: do we have the definition of access certificate?

I believe that `requiring additional security measures to establish trust` is too much generic or painfull, I would only say which security measures it needs.
